---
layout: post
title: "The dynamics of social capital"
date: 2020-02-01
---

In my career so far, I have been a huge benefactor of free tools and information. I have continuously had access to the best tools and information needed to do my job for the cost of a decent internet connection. This has been made possible by the open-source movement in software(R, python) and the subsequent rise in free online education(think Wikipedia, Reddit, Coursera, et al.). The saying goes that there are no free lunches in life. But in the case of information and technology, it seems that not only are there free lunches but also the best lunches are often the free ones.
This violates a few paradigms of the physical world where we live in where the good stuff always has to be paid for. And almost nothing, which is worth anything to you, is free. There are a bunch of fundamental reasons why software has diverged in this respect from the real world, which I haven't thought about enough to list them. An exhaustive list can be found [here](http://www.linfo.org/open_source_development_incentives.html). 

I imagine that like me, a lot of people working in software or related industries, in general, would want to help the open-source movement in information and software because they feel grateful for how much it has helped them. There are a few relatively obvious ways we could go about it. The most direct way would be to contribute to it yourself. Contribute code for software projects or organize information to help people use them. This is something we all can do - to a different extent, given our abilities and availability. Another almost equally direct way would be to financially support the organizations that help co-ordinate projects in the open-source world. Think of Wikipedia or the R foundation. 
Although these are straightforward ways, they are also fairly hard to take. Contributing to open source requires a lot of commitment, expertise, and awareness of what the current state of any project is. And donating anything that would be substantial would be a stretch for a single person.

Fortunately, there is another way. What if we could repay the contributors with something they could use? It sounds like what money was made for, and we already established that that might not be viable for a lot of us. But money is just one, albeit the most efficient method to store and transfer value. Another way is through donating "social capital". 

Generally, people who give out stuff for free are looking to increase their visibility, credibility, and goodwill - a cocktail I will loosely term as social capital. They are counting on people to look at their work, like it, and talk it up to their friends and colleagues. When this happens, they gain social capital. Once they have enough - they can start converting that into 'actual capital' i.e. money - through offering a premium service on top of the free stuff, consulting to businesses one-on-one, etc. 
The good news is that supporting creators through 'donating' social capital might be much more practical for a lot of us than the other ways discussed above. So the next time we come across a project or tool that is useful, we can simply donate a little social capital to the creator by posting about it on our blogs and urging people in our networks to check it out. We would have then channeled our gratefulness towards these creators into something useful for them.
