---
layout: post
title: "Quotable Quotes - Margin Call"
date: 2022-01-23
---


[Tuld]
Jesus, when did you start feeling so
sorry for yourself, it's unbearable...
What, you think we may have helped put
some people out of business today? That
it's all just for naught? Well you've
been doing that everyday for almost forty
years Sam. And if all this is for naught
then so is everything else out there.
It's just money, it's made up, a piece of
paper with some pictures on it so we
don't all kill each other trying to get
something to eat. But it's not wrong and
it's certainly not any different today
than it's ever been. Ever. 1637, 1797,
1819, 37, 57,84, 1901, 07, 1929, 37,
73, and 1987... God damn did that
motherfucker fuck me up good, 92, 97,
2000, and whatever this is gonna be
called. They're just the same thing over
and over. We can't help ourselves, and
you and I can't control it, stop it, slow
it, or even ever so slightly alter it...
We just react... and we get paid well for
it if we're right... and get left by the
side of the road if we're wrong. There's
always been and there's always gonna be
the same percentage of winners and
losers, happy fucks and sad sacks, fat
pigs and starving dogs in this world...
yes there may be more of us today... but
the percentages... they always stay
exactly the same.
