Yesterday a friend about his undergrad at Ashoka University. For the first 2 years, students must take 8 foundational courses across math, economics, history, writing, critical thinking, history, etc. These courses are intended to give the students all the frames through which the world can be understood. They then went on to specialize in the major of their choice - out of interest, not contingent on an AIR.
I was so jealous. My education from 10th standard onwards has only been about increasing depth in math. I have felt a void in my knowledge when I try to understand the world. Why people are willing to die for their religion? Why the RBI does not decrease interest rates? Why is communism hated? 
My education and my subseqent career had me reaching deeper and deeper into the bowels of a few narrow fields.
I can reason why very large over-parameterized Neural Networks obtain great generalization performance. But I am dumbfounded when I think about why my mom puts the onions before all other vegetables while cooking. Why are there caste-based reservations in India?
Inadvertently,  I have been trying to complete my foundation courses through books, podcasts, and video lectures. My progress although has been remarkably shit. It isn't the time or the laziness, which certainly are contributing factors. It is the comfort I have with fields where I have the frames to get that quick gotcha moment. I gravitate towards it. It is a form of intellectual laziness. 
I could not help but wonder how it would have been had I had these courses when I was in college. I could not basnk in my victimhood for long before realising it would have made no difference. I was clueless and had not developed the idea of getting an education. My model for a course was someone setting an arbitraty goal and me gaming y way to that goal. 


